Pass Specification (#7)
linebender/rfcs: rfcs/0007-pass-spec.md

To address these invalidations, Masonry runs a set of **rewrite passes** over the tree:

- **MUTATE** pass.
- **UPDATE_TREE** pass.
- **UPDATE_FOCUS** pass.
- **UPDATE_DISABLED** pass.
- **UPDATE_ANIM** pass.
- **layout** pass.
- **UPDATE_SCROLLS** pass.
- **compose** pass.
- **UPDATE_POINTER** pass.

(The lowercase passes have methods with matching names in the Widget trait.)

By default, each of these passes returns immediately, unless pass-dependent invalidation flags are set or work is requested.
Each pass can generally request work for later passes; for instance, the MUTATE pass can invalidate the layout of a widget, in which case the `layout` pass will run on that widget and its children and parents.

Passes may also request work for *previous* passes, in which case all rewrite passes are run again in sequence.
For instance, the UPDATE_POINTER may change a widget's size, requiring another layout pass.

To avoid infinite loops in those cases, the number of reruns has a static limit.
If passes are still requested past that limit, they're delayed to a later frame.

#### MUTATE pass

> The **MUTATE** pass runs a list of callbacks with mutable access to the widget tree.

Reviewer: I feel like having multiple callbacks here has the potential to make things very messy...

For example, what if a child runs a mutation, but then a parent also runs a mutation which would e.g. delete that child.

I'm not sure what we can do in these cases?

Author: Skip the deleted child's mutation.

It's not ideal, but it makes enough sense that it probably doesn't need a warning. I'd expect this case to be extremely rare in practice.

Reviewer: Concretely, what are the use cases for the mutate pass? Is it something like `Dropdown`s?

Author: > Is it something like Dropdowns?

That's a good example, but my goal for the mutate pass is more open-ended than "support this group of use-cases".

The mutate pass is there as an escape hatch for future cases we might not think of, or cases where the developer doesn't want to engage with the full complexity of the pass system; it's a way to give full control over a widget and its children without having to track pass invariants.

These callbacks can be queued with the `mutate_later()` method of various context types.

> 

Reviewer: Does this pass also run the driver, with any action from the event handler?

Author: For now the assumption is that the RenderRoot isn't aware of the driver.

So the template for any interaction is "the platform runs a RenderRoot method, which triggers a bunch of passes, which produce a list of signals, and the platform interprets these signals how it sees fit, potentially running the driver and/or re-running the passes".

"Mutable access" means that those callbacks are given a `WidgetMut` to the widget that requested them, something that is otherwise only accessible from the owner of the global `RenderRoot` object (see "External Mutation" section).

#### UPDATE_XXX passes

Update passes mostly run internal calculations.
They compute if some widget's property has changed, and send it a matching `on_update_status` event (see "Status" section below).

For instance, if a user presses `Tab` and the event isn't handled in a widget, the framework will run the `UPDATE_FOCUS` pass, which will automatically switch keyboard focus to the next focus-accepting widget.
Both the previously-focused widget and the newly-focused widget will get an `on_update_status` call with relevant values.

#### Layout pass

The layout pass runs bidirectionally, passing constraints from the top down and getting back sizes and other layout info from the bottom up.

It is subject to be reworked in the future to be closer to the semantics of web layout engines and the Taffy crate.

> Unlike with other passes, container widgets need their `Widget::layout()` method to call the `WidgetPod::layout()` method of their children.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike with other passes, container widget's `Widget::layout()` method must call `WidgetPod::layout()` of all of their children.
```

Not doing so is a logical bug and will panic when debug assertions are on.

#### Compose pass

The **compose** pass runs top-down and assigns transforms to children.

> Transform-only layout changes (e.g. scrolling) should request compose instead of requesting layout.

Reviewer: Would `compose` have the possibility of stashing child widgets, e.g. if they scroll off-screen.
Would that require a mutate pass to be ran?

Author: Stashing in the sense it's currently used in the codebase still isn't implemented or documented.

Short answer is "compose could trigger a stash but it probably shouldn't".

> Would that require a mutate pass to be ran?

No, because stashing doesn't change the tree structure. A stashed widget still has the same parent, a parent with stashed children still lists them as children, etc.

> The framework automatically calls the `compose` methods of all widgets in the tree, in depth-first preorder, where child order is determined by their position in the `children_ids()` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Masonry automatically calls the `compose` methods of all widgets in the tree, in depth-first preorder, where child order is determined by their position in the `children_ids()` array.
```

> The framework automatically calls the `compose` methods of all widgets in the tree, in depth-first preorder, where child order is determined by their position in the `children_ids()` array.

Reviewer: How does compose interact with Layout here? I.e. if `needs_layout` is called, but not `needs_compose`?

Author: I haven't considered it. It probably doesn't hurt to automatically set `needs_compose` during the layout pass.

### Display passes

Event and rewrite passes can invalidate how the widget tree is presented to the user.

If that happens, a redraw frame will be requested from the environment (e.g. the Winit event loop).
When the environment applies the redraw, it will run the **display passes** as needed:

- **paint:** The paint pass gets a Vello Scene description from each widget.
These scenes are then stitched together in pre-order: first the parent, then its first child, then *its* first child, etc.
- **accessibility:** The accessibility pass gets an AccessKit node description from each widget.
These nodes together form the accessibility tree.

Methods for these passes should be written under the assumption that they can be skipped or called multiple times for arbitrary reasons.
Therefore, their ability to affect the widget tree is limited.

The framework automatically calls these methods for all widgets in the tree in depth-first preorder.

### External mutation

> Code with mutable access to the `RenderRoot`, like the Xilem app runner, can get mutable access to the root widget and all its children through the `edit_root_widget()` method, which takes a callback and passes it a `WidgetMut` to the root widget.

Reviewer: Ah, ok. Maybe this answers my earlier question?

### Editing the widget tree

Most passes cannot modify the widget tree.
They can modify widgets themselves, for instance changing a label's color, but they cannot add or remove widgets from the tree.
You cannot remove a widget's children during layout, for instance.

The only pass which can modify the widget tree is the MUTATE pass, triggered by either `edit_root_widget` or `mutate_later`.

This means you don't need to worry about the widget tree changing in any other pass.

### Widget methods and context types

Widgets are types which implement the `masonry::Widget` trait.

This trait includes a set of methods that must be implemented to hook into the different passes listed above:

```rust
// Exact signatures may differ
trait Widget {
    on_pointer_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &PointerEvent);
    on_text_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &TextEvent);
    on_access_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &AccessEvent);

    on_update_status(&mut self, ctx: &mut UpdateCtx, event: &StatusChange);
    layout(&mut self, ctx: &mut LayoutCtx) -> Size;

>     compose(&mut self, ctx: &mut ComposeCtx) -> Size;

Reviewer: Why does `compose` return a `Size` here?

Author: Copy-paste error.

    paint(&mut self, ctx: &mut PaintCtx, scene: &mut Scene);

>     accessibility(&mut self, ctx: &mut AccessCtx);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fn on_pointer_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &PointerEvent);
    fn on_text_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &TextEvent);
    fn on_access_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &AccessEvent);

    fn on_update_status(&mut self, ctx: &mut UpdateCtx, event: &StatusChange);
    fn layout(&mut self, ctx: &mut LayoutCtx) -> Size;
    fn compose(&mut self, ctx: &mut ComposeCtx) -> Size;

    fn paint(&mut self, ctx: &mut PaintCtx, scene: &mut Scene);
    fn accessibility(&mut self, ctx: &mut AccessCtx);
```

This will mostly involve changes to `WidgetPod`'s internals.

For targeted passes, we should add a private method to RenderRoot which directly sends an arbitrary event to a specific widget, then propagates changes upwards.

### Add MUTATE pass

We should add a queue of callbacks with their target widget.
Calling `FoobarCtx::mutate_later()` would add a callback to that queue.

The MUTATE pass would then go through that queue.

### Add compose pass

We should add a `compose()` method to the WidgetTrait, a `WidgetPod::compose` method, a `ComposeCtx` type, a `RenderRoot::root_compose()` method, etc.

The `ParentWindowOrigin` lifecycle event should be replaced by this compose pass.

Context types should get a `request_compose()` method.

### Remove LifecycleCtx methods

The following methods specific to LifecycleCtx should be removed, and replaced with getter methods on the Widget trait:

- `register_for_focus`
- `register_as_text_input`
- `register_as_portal`

For instance, when a widget is created, `WidgetPod` should call a method called `Widget::accepts_focus` on the widget.
If so, it should add it to the set of widgets accepting focus.

> Then when the widget is deleted, it should be removed from that set.

Reviewer: What about when a widget can't be focused but isn't deleted? I guess the only scenario that could happen is when it is disabled, which would already match this case?

Author: If a widget accepting focus is disabled or stashed, it should be removed from the "focusable" set.

Note that describing it as a "set" is a simplification that probably shouldn't make it to the final documentation. It's more of a logical set, I don't think we want to store and maintain a list of all the focusable widgets by default.

- `UPDATE_DISABLED`: Sends DisabledChanged event.
- `UPDATE_ANIM`: Sends AnimFrame event.
- `UPDATE_SCROLLS`: Sends RequestPanToChild.
- `UPDATE_POINTER`: Sends HotChanged and updates the cursor icon.

These features should progressively be moved out of the current `WidgetPod::lifecycle` method.

### Replace Lifecycle and StatusChange with StatusUpdate event

The previous sections are about progressive changes that should be implemented to take things off the lifecycle pass.

The lifecycle pass and the Lifecycle event should eventually be replaced with the UPDATE passes and StatusUpdate event altogether.

### Rework paint pass

The paint pass should now build the root scene in a single pass.

`WidgetPod::paint()` will do the following:

- Call the inner paint().
- That paint "returns" both a scene fragment and an optional clip layer.
- Append the scene fragment to the global scene.
- If the clip layer is Some, push it.
- For each child, call `WidgetPod::paint()` with the transform that was set in `compose()`.
- If the clip layer is Some, pop it.

Unlike the current algorithm where fragments are added to parent fragments, here they are added directly to the root.

> This is `O(N)` instead of `O(N * Depth)`.

Reviewer: I know what you're talking about here, but I don't think a casual reader would understand this comment.

Maybe linking to [#xilem > The mystery of the Xilem bomb](https://xi.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/354396-xilem/topic/The.20mystery.20of.20the.20Xilem.20bomb) is sufficient?

- Having direct event targeting means we can remove a bunch of `RouteFoobar` events that do nothing but carry a `Foobar` event through the widget tree.
- Limiting mutations to the widget tree to a specific pass lets us remove the `WidgetAdded` event and some very thorny logic.

Overall, these changes together will make the new pass system more cohesive and predictable.

## Prior art

TODO

- Bevy spawn
- Compose pass: web platform.
- pass systems in other Rust frameworks
- Qt

## Unresolved questions

The RFC is vague on the following implementation points:

- Exact pointer capture behavior.
- Exact focus behavior.
- Detailed description of the UPDATE passes.
- Static limit on the number of reruns.
- The total list of context methods.

We will likely figure them out during implementation and document them in real-time.

## Future possibilities

### Reparenting children

Right now children can only be added and removed.

In the future, we could add the ability to splice a widget subtree from one parent widget to another.

### Focus

Focus needs to be better defined.

The concept of "local focus" vs "active focus" might need a more formal definition.

> A related question is how we preserve local focus for situations that "borrow" it. For instance, if you press `Tab` to open a menu, the menu should have focus.

Reviewer: When does tab open a menu? Do you mean <kbd>alt</kbd> here?

(Incidentally, GitHub supports the `<kbd>` tag)

Author: Oops, yeah, I meant Alt.

Both the previously-focused widget and the newly-focused widget will get an `on_update_status` call with relevant values.

#### Layout pass

The layout pass runs bidirectionally, passing constraints from the top down and getting back sizes and other layout info from the bottom up.

It is subject to be reworked in the future to be closer to the semantics of web layout engines and the Taffy crate.

Unlike with other passes, container widgets' `Widget::layout()` method must call `WidgetPod::layout()` on all of their children.
Not doing so is a logical bug and will panic when debug assertions are on.

#### Compose pass

The **compose** pass runs top-down and assigns transforms to children.
Transform-only layout changes (e.g. scrolling) should request compose instead of requesting layout.

Compose is meant to be a cheaper way to position widgets than layout.
Because the compose pass is more limited than layout, it's easier to recompute in many situations.

For instance, if a widget in a list changes size, its siblings and parents must be re-laid out to account for the change; whereas changing a given widget's transform only affects its children.

> Masonry automatically calls the `compose` methods of all widgets in the tree, in depth-first preorder, where child order is determined by their position in the `children_ids()` array.

Reviewer 2: I actually hope, we can design `layout` in a way that this is not really necessary (e.g. by dirty tracking via the flags and only recalculating the path that is affected by this). It would be really nice if we could (unlike in the web) make layout changes really interactive, e.g. data-driven animations etc. (which I think would play nice with Xilem) But I'm no expert with layouting algorithms, so I'm not really sure...

But I guess this is mostly meant to be a more general pass than `ParentWindowOrigin`

Author: Incremental layout is the goal, and there are ways to implement it, but it's not trivial. Some layout change *must* update sibling widgets.

For instance, if you have a widget defined as "be as wide as my widest widest child", if one of the children gets much wider, then all its siblings will have more available space and need to be re-laid out.

One of the things I'd like to implement is flags that deliberately rules out those cases, eg a flag a widget can set to say "my layout is independent from the layout of my children". Or "my height is only dependent on available width, no available height".

In any case, that's beyond this PR.

    fn on_access_event(&mut self, ctx: &mut EventCtx, event: &AccessEvent);

    fn on_update_status(&mut self, ctx: &mut UpdateCtx, event: &StatusChange);
    fn layout(&mut self, ctx: &mut LayoutCtx) -> Size;
    fn compose(&mut self, ctx: &mut ComposeCtx);

    fn paint(&mut self, ctx: &mut PaintCtx, scene: &mut Scene);
    fn accessibility(&mut self, ctx: &mut AccessCtx);

    // ...
}
```

These methods all take a given context type as a parameter.
Methods aside, `WidgetMut` references can provide a `MutateCtx` context.

Those context types have many methods, some shared, some unique to a given pass.
There are too many to document here, but we can lay out some general principles:

- Display passes should be pure and can be skipped occasionally, therefore their context types (`PaintCtx` and `AccessCtx`) can't set invalidation flags or send signals.
- The `layout` and `compose` passes lay out all widgets, which are transiently invalid during the passes, therefore `LayoutCtx`and `ComposeCtx` cannot access the size and position of the `self` widget.
They can access the layout of children if they have already been laid out.

> - For the same reason reason, `LayoutCtx`and `ComposeCtx` cannot create a `WidgetRef` reference to a child.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For the same reason, `LayoutCtx`and `ComposeCtx` cannot create a `WidgetRef` reference to a child.
```

For instance, pressing space when a button is focused will trigger that button.

There are two types of focus: active and inactive focus.
Active focus is the default one; inactive focus is when the window your app runs in has lost focus itself.

In that case, we still mark the widget as focused, but with a different color to signal that e.g. typing on the keyboard won't actually affect it.

## Implementation strategy

### More explicitly document passes in the code

Comments and method names in `RenderRoot` and `WidgetPod` should explicitly call out passes where they happen.

The "User-facing explanation" section should be added to the crate's documentation, and in-code documentation should refer to it.

### Rename WidgetCtx to MutateCtx

Since the MUTATE pass is becoming a documented part of the code, MutateCtx would be a clearer name for that context type.

### Change how widgets are added

The WidgetAdded event should be removed for `Lifecycle`, and the `WidgetPodInner` type should be removed.

Instead, widgets should be created and added to the widget tree as a single atomic operation.

> To keep the WidgetPod logic simple and avoid too many corner cases, this is only allowed inside the MUTATE pass.

Reviewer 2: I wonder how that will look like in practice? 
I.e. with different constructors for different kind of widgets.
so is something like this still valid (more pseudocode, this is wrong of course):

```rust
let button = Button::new(..);
// later e.g. for a flex
flex_widget.insert_flex_child_pod(button);
```

Or how should that roughly look like?
Is the constructor for a widget just a data container, and gets properly constructed when adding that child to whatever widget it contains?

(But the general idea sounds good)

Author: Yeah, we're still trying to figure that out.

See [this discussion on zulip](https://xi.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/317477-masonry/topic/Implementing.20the.20new.20pass.20system/near/457380951).

> `MutateCtx` should have an `add_child` and a `remove_child` method. 

Reviewer 2: I wonder how moving a child from A -> B can be modeled (as mentioned in the explicit-identity zulip topic), so that ideally properties where it makes sense can be animated.

Author: Yeah, there's a reason "Reparenting children" is in future possibilities.

FWIW, I favor something like the [View Transition API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transitions_API).

Unlike the current algorithm where fragments are added to parent fragments, here they are added directly to the root.
This is `O(N)` [instead of `O(N * Depth)`](https://xi.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/354396-xilem/topic/The.20mystery.20of.20the.20Xilem.20bomb).

We should add `PaintCtx::set_clip_box()` and `PaintCtx::remove_clip_box()` methods so widgets can clip their children.
In most cases this will be a rectangle, but it can be an arbitrary path, like a rectangle with rounded corners.

### Get full test coverage of Context methods

These behaviors and the invariants that come with them should be part of a spec.
This spec should take the form of both doc comments, code comments, and a full testing suite.

This suite should have full coverage of all Context methods and WidgetPod methods.
Because some context methods are macro-duplicated between context types, some tests might need to be duplicated as well.

## Drawbacks

### Restricting Widget constructors

Restricting Widget constructors adds another complication people learning Masonry need to be taught about.

It's a complication that won't be visible to users of higher-level frameworks like Xilem.

> But it will be visible to Xilem *maintainers*; therefore that pattern should be well-documented, with various examples of code that needs to create widgets.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I can't read that out of the RFC, but what is exactly meant? Is it related to the atomic creation in section `### Change how widgets are added`?

Author: It is. I probably need to rewrite this section once we figure out the final widget creation API.

### Rewrite passes

After an event pass, some flags may have been changed, and some values may have been invalidated and need to be recomputed.
To address these invalidations, Masonry runs a set of **rewrite passes** over the tree:

- **MUTATE** pass.
- **UPDATE_TREE** pass.
- **UPDATE_FOCUS** pass.
- **UPDATE_DISABLED** pass.
- **UPDATE_ANIM** pass.
- **layout** pass.
- **UPDATE_SCROLLS** pass.
- **compose** pass.
- **UPDATE_POINTER** pass.

(The lowercase passes have methods with matching names in the Widget trait.)

By default, each of these passes returns immediately, unless pass-dependent invalidation flags are set or work is requested.
Each pass can generally request work for later passes; for instance, the MUTATE pass can invalidate the layout of a widget, in which case the `layout` pass will run on that widget and its children and parents.

Passes may also request work for *previous* passes, in which case all rewrite passes are run again in sequence.
For instance, the UPDATE_POINTER may change a widget's size, requiring another layout pass.

To avoid infinite loops in those cases, the number of reruns has a static limit.

> If passes are still requested past that limit, they're delayed to a later frame.

Reviewer 2: I guess that's relevant for frame-pacing, would it make sense to instead use a max duration limit (possibly relevant for layout too)?
(infinite-loop detection would be even better I guess, but that's out of scope for now I guess)

Reviewer: The reason for this design is that the only infinite loops would be pathological cases, and we expect any reasonable scene to only require 2 or maybe 3 cycles. That is, it's a bug in your app if you hit this fallback, so it's not a problem to have it present.
